---
layout: post_mtg
title: Type 4 | The Rules
type: post
category: mtg
isLive: true
permalink: /type4-rules
---

_Last updated: February 2018_

"Type 4" is a variant of Magic: The Gathering. Think of it like EDH/Commander meets cube draft meets really stupid fun.

Type 4 is played as a limited format using a pre-assembled stack (similar to a cube). You can draft from the stack, hand out random chunks like sealed, or simply have everyone play off a shared deck.

Play it just like a normal, multiplayer free-for-all game. Only with two additional rules:

1. You have unlimited mana of all colors at all times
2. You can only play one spell per turn

There is a great wiki article on [Gamepedia](https://mtg.gamepedia.com/Type_4) with more details and history

Wizards has also ran articles on the format back in [2004](https://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/limited-infinity-2004-03-01) and [2009](https://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/serious-fun/fourth-type-2009-07-28), both with fun play-by-plays. Highly recommended!

Described here are my house rules for playing Type 4.

## Setup

- Divide the entire stack into X equal-sized piles, where X is the number of players. Each player takes a pile. That is now their deck

- Cards that were in your deck at the beginning of the game are owned by you for the rest of the game

  - Cards retrieved from outside the game (eg <auto-card>Booster Tutor</auto-card>) are owned by you for the rest of the game, and then removed

- Each player starts the game with 5 cards in hand. First player draws on their turn. No mulligans

- Each player starts with 20 life

## The Rules

- You have unlimited mana of all colors at all times

  - You may activate a card like <auto-card>Legacy Weapon</auto-card> as long as there are still targets

- You may only cast one spell each turn (think <auto-card>Arcane Laboratory</auto-card>)

- If the spell is "free", meaning it didn't cost you any mana to cast, it doesn't count towards your one-spell limit. This can happen with:

  - alternate costs like <auto-card>Force of Will</auto-card>
  - another card made it free, like Cascade or <auto-card>Djinn of Wishes</auto-card>
  - it cost 0 mana to cast, like the conditional timings of <auto-card>Summoning Trap</auto-card> or <auto-card>Not of This World</auto-card>
  - Note: paying an additional cost like Kicker is both legal and encouraged, the spell is still considered "free"

## FAQ

- Suspend is an activated ability. When the card comes out of suspend and gets cast, it’s free. Therefore, a suspended card will never count towards your 1 spell per turn

  - eg: <auto-card>Deep-Sea Kraken</auto-card>

- If you cycle a card that has a triggered ability, you get the draw from the cycle after resolving the ability (cycling goes on the stack first, trigger goes on top)

- In the case of "ability wars", the defensive/reactive activation wins out

  - eg: <auto-card>Smokespew Invoker</auto-card> vs <auto-card>Thornling</auto-card> increasing it's toughness: Thornling lives

- Monstrosity always gets a chance to resolve while the creature is still on the battlefield and under it’s current controller’s control

  - eg: <auto-card>Stormbreath Dragon</auto-card> vs <auto-card>Legacy Weapon</auto-card>: Stormbreath is guaranteed the triggered ability

### Does this count as a spell?

- The following DOES count as casting a spell:
  - Flashback
- The following DOES NOT count as casting a spell:
  - Cycling
  - Channel
  - Bloodrush
  - Unearth

### When I cast something for free...

- The following DOES WORK when casting free spells:
  - Kicker
  - Buyback
- The following DOES NOT WORK when casting free spells:
  - Morph
  - Cycling
  - Channel
  - Bloodrush

## Card Specific

- Both the cards <auto-card>Spelljack</auto-card> and <auto-card>Kheru Spellsnatcher</auto-card> give you the spell to cast for the rest of the game (even after Kheru dies). You must still obey the timing restriction of that card (Sorcery vs Instant speed)

- If you cast <auto-card>Corpse Dance</auto-card> during the end step, the creature sticks around until the end of the next turn

## Tips

- Most cards with Cycling are better off being cycled for the draw plus triggered ability

  - eg: <auto-card>Resounding Thunder</auto-card> and <auto-card>Decree of Silence</auto-card>

- The card <auto-card>Benalish Commander</auto-card> is meant to be suspended for X=&infin;, providing a steady stream of chump blockers for the rest of game without tying up a spell cast

## Errata

I try not have any errate on cards in Type4, to ensure it's easy to pickup and play

There is the one exception, both because it's so rare AND game breaking:

- You cannot use <auto-card>Azorius Guildmage</auto-card>’s second ability to counter the same ability from another <auto-card>Azorius Guildmage</auto-card>
