---
layout: post_mtg_building
title: EDH | Building Karoo
type: post
category: mtg
isLive: true
permalink: /edh-karoo
---

My first ever EDH commander was <auto-card>Scion of the Ur-Dragon</auto-card>, back when I was working with a limited card pool and a student's budget. As a result, I ran the full ten Bounce Lands, aka the Ravnica <auto-card>Karoo</auto-card>s.

<div class="center mtg-small">
  <auto-card-image>Azorius Chancery</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Boros Garrison</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Dimir Aqueduct</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Golgari Rot Farm</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Gruul Turf</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Izzet Boilerworks</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Orzhov Basilica</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Rakdos Carnarium</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Selesnya Sanctuary</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Simic Growth Chamber</auto-card-image>
</div>

The upsides to these lands are many:

- They provide card advantage - one land drop, two mana sources
- They allow you to "blink" your lands, like resetting the counters on a <auto-card>Glacial Chasm</auto-card>
- They play well with <auto-card name="Voyaging Satyr">cards that untap lands</auto-card>, producing more mana than usual

At the time, I ran a few cards that played well with the manabase, and it was always a pleasant surprise when the stars aligned.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Amulet of Vigor</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Garruk Wildspeaker</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Frantic Search</auto-card-image>
  <div class="img-comment">back when Amulet of Vigor was Standard bulk</div>
</div>

So what if that was my central gameplan?

## Enter Karoo.dec

The decision to create a deck revolving around Bounce Lands comes from a few recent events:

1. My <a href="https://tappedout.net/mtg-decks/maro-speaker-v3-final/">Maro/Zegana</a> deck that reliably dumped absurd amounts of lands into play
2. My playgroup increasingly favoring <auto-card name="Cultivate">land-based</auto-card> ramp strategies
3. The recently printed <auto-card>Fall of the Thran</auto-card>

My current guess is this: if I can resolve land destruction like <auto-card>Fall of the Thran</auto-card> in a deck full of Bounce lands, backed with a general game plan that rebuilds mana bases quickly, I should be able to manufacture enough tempo advantage to win the game.

## The Commander

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Jodah, Archmage Eternal</auto-card-image>
</div>

I needed a five color commander to run all 10 Bounce Lands. Most of the WUBRG color commanders are just big bodies, and don't offer much utility. Jodah will help me power out some of my big control spells that you'll see later.

That said, he's far from essential, and the deck isn't built around him at all. I could see swapping in <auto-card>Progenitus</auto-card> for the guaranteed win-con, though just having him as your commander can start you off on the wrong foot politically.

## The Manabase

So ten bounce lands. Check.

Given that this is a five color deck and "Landfall Matters", I decided to stick close to the <a href="https://www.mtgsalvation.com/forums/the-game/commander-edh/780985-creating-the-ideal-5-color-mana-base">"perfect manabase"</a>.

That means adding all 10 duals and 10 fetches, putting me at 30 lands. Then, because I need to hit Green early for fixing and ramping, add all the Forest shocks and cycling lands.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Breeding Pool</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Overgrown Tomb</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Stomping Ground</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Temple Garden</auto-card-image>

  <auto-card-image>Scattered Groves</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Sheltered Thicket</auto-card-image>
</div>

By that same logic, throw in a <auto-card>Krosan Verge</auto-card>, and round it off to 40 with a few ETB utility lands.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Krosan Verge</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Bojuka Bog</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Halimar Depths</auto-card-image>
</div>

We can reuse the <auto-card>Bojuka Bog</auto-card> and <auto-card>Halimar Depths</auto-card> thanks to the bounce lands! It may seem slow, but we'll have land acceleration to spare.

## About those Forests

I want to ramp and color fix since I'm five colors. But given the constraints of my mana base, the usual all-stars like <auto-card>Kodama's Reach</auto-card> won't work. Instead, thanks to our duals and shocks, anything that tutors up a Forests will help us color fix easily.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Ranger's Path</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Hunting Wilds</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Skyshroud Claim</auto-card-image>
</div>

We can also grab non-Forests by their type, or grab anything with more generic tutors.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Farseek</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Tempt with Discovery</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Realms Uncharted</auto-card-image>
</div>

Given our graveyard recursion and general strategy, the correct play for non-basic tutors is to always grab Bounce Lands.

## Graveyard Recursion

Knowing we run fetch lands, and that we like to blow things up, we want to re-use the lands in our graveyard. Thankfully, we've got a couple options now.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Life from the Loam</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Crucible of Worlds</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Muldrotha, the Gravetide</auto-card-image>
</div>

## Land Acceleration

So given the graveyard recursion, and that Bounce Lands require another land drop to replay what was bounced, how do we get all these lands out quickly?

We've got two categories of land acceleration. The first ones increase the total land drops possible. These play nicely with <auto-card name="Crucible of Worlds">Crucible</auto-card> and <auto-card name="Ramunap Excavator">friends</auto-card>.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Exploration</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Oracle of Mul Daya</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Rites of Flourishing</auto-card-image>
</div>

The second category "cheats" them directly into play from our hand. Though less synergistic, we can always use our normal land drops (from hand or graveyard) to play a Bounce land, then use one of these to cheat the bounced land back in.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Burgeoning</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Kynaios and Tiro of Meletis</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Sakura-Tribe Scout</auto-card-image>
</div>

Tappers like <auto-card>Sakura-Tribe Scout</auto-card> are of particular note:

1. There are a number of functional reprints, allowing us a lot of redundancy
2. They all form a powerful combo with <auto-card>Retreat to Coralhelm</auto-card>

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Walking Atlas</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Retreat to Coralhelm</auto-card-image>
  <div class="img-comment">Brother From Another <span class="strike">Mother</span> Zendikar</div>
</div>

With <auto-card name="Retreat to Coralhelm">Retreat</auto-card> out, you tap a creature, put in a land, then untap that creature. This can accomplish one of two things:

1. Dump all the lands from your hand into play
2. Put a Bounce Land into play, then have it bounce itself

The second loop gives you infinite landfall triggers. If you have <auto-card>Amulet of Vigor</auto-card> out, you can also generate infinite mana by tapping the land with the bounce trigger on the stack.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Ob Nixilis, the Fallen</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Tatyova, Benthic Druid</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Amulet of Vigor</auto-card-image>
</div>

## Let's not forget the Land Destruction

Part of the original conceit was that:

1. Our average land is worth more than theirs
2. We should be able to recover faster

So blowing up lands is good. But we still might need SOME mana to restart our engine. Rather than just running every <auto-card>Armageddon</auto-card> and <auto-card>Jokulhaups</auto-card> available, we want cards to play to our specific strengths.

### Strategy #1: My Finite Resources are Better than Yours

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Balancing Act</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Razia's Purification</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Natural Balance</auto-card-image>
  <div class="img-comment">note: my playgroup is ok with <auto-card>Cataclysm</auto-card>, your mileage may vary</div>
</div>

If everyone's land counts become equal, we should be best positioned to produce more mana. We're also better prepared to sacrifice lands given our plentiful graveyard recursion.

### Strategy #2: I Can Rebuild Faster from a Soft Reset

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Fall of the Thran</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Sunder</auto-card-image>
</div>

These are the times I'm both grateful and sad that <auto-card>Upheaval</auto-card> is banned. If we want to be particularly rude, we can follow up a <auto-card>Sunder</auto-card> with a <auto-card name="Windfall">wheel</auto-card>.

### Strategy #3: Ramp Fast then Pause The Game

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Ward of Bones</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Territorial Dispute</auto-card-image>
  <div class="img-comment">it only took me 2 years to find a deck for Territorial Dispute</div>
</div>

In both cases, we can make a "fair" card one-sided. <auto-card>Ward of Bones</auto-card> works especially well given the small number of lands we need to reach decent mana. <auto-card>Territorial Dispute</auto-card> can be continually fed and circumvented via "cheats" like <auto-card>Sakura-Tribe Scout</auto-card>.

## Rounding it Out

So we've got our gameplan. How do we make this a deck?

We've got plenty of mana and maybe too much ramp, which means we need lots of draw to compensate. <auto-card>Wheels</auto-card> are particularly good for ramp decks like this where you're constantly dumping your hand onto the field, and the Wheels that discard can also feed our <auto-card name="Crucible of Worlds">graveyard</auto-card> interaction.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Wheel of Fortune</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Whispering Madness</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Time Spiral</auto-card-image>
</div>

"Free spells" like <auto-card>Time Spiral</auto-card> and <auto-card>Frantic Search</auto-card> also double as <auto-card name="Dark Ritual">rituals</auto-card> thanks to the bounce lands.

We need interaction. This is where my buddy <auto-card name="Jodah, Archmage Eternal">Jodah</auto-card> finally comes in, giving us a discount (as well as color fixing) for some high-end spells.

<div class="center">
  <auto-card-image>Decree of Pain</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>Dread Cacodemon</auto-card-image>
  <auto-card-image>In Garruk's Wake</auto-card-image>
  <div class="img-comment">not-pictured: answers to artifacts/enchantments, because they tend be cheaper</div>
</div>

## The List as of Writing

<auto-card-list preview>
  # name Jodah, the Vigorous
  # info May 2018
  # link https://tappedout.net/mtg-decks/jodah-the-vigorous/ TappedOut

  1x Jodah, Archmage Eternal *CMDR*

  Land (40)
  1x Arid Mesa
  1x Azorius Chancery
  1x Badlands
  1x Bayou
  1x Bloodstained Mire
  1x Bojuka Bog
  1x Boros Garrison
  1x Breeding Pool
  1x Dimir Aqueduct
  1x Flooded Strand
  1x Golgari Rot Farm
  1x Gruul Turf
  1x Halimar Depths
  1x Izzet Boilerworks
  1x Krosan Verge
  1x Marsh Flats
  1x Misty Rainforest
  1x Orzhov Basilica
  1x Overgrown Tomb
  1x Plateau
  1x Polluted Delta
  1x Rakdos Carnarium
  1x Savannah
  1x Scalding Tarn
  1x Scattered Groves
  1x Scrubland
  1x Selesnya Sanctuary
  1x Sheltered Thicket
  1x Simic Growth Chamber
  1x Skyline Cascade
  1x Stomping Ground
  1x Taiga
  1x Temple Garden
  1x Tropical Island
  1x Tundra
  1x Underground Sea
  1x Verdant Catacombs
  1x Volcanic Island
  1x Windswept Heath
  1x Wooded Foothills

  Sorcery (25)
  1x Balancing Act
  1x Bring to Light
  1x Broken Bond
  1x By Force
  1x Decimate
  1x Decree of Pain
  1x Fabricate
  1x Farseek
  1x Hunting Wilds
  1x In Garruk's Wake
  1x Life from the Loam
  1x Merciless Eviction
  1x Natural Balance
  1x Painful Truths
  1x Ranger's Path
  1x Razia's Purification
  1x Skyshroud Claim
  1x Spoils of Victory
  1x Summer Bloom
  1x Tempt with Discovery
  1x Time Spiral
  1x Wargate
  1x Wheel of Fortune
  1x Whispering Madness
  1x Windfall

  Instant (6)
  1x Constant Mists
  1x Cyclonic Rift
  1x Fact or Fiction
  1x Frantic Search
  1x Realms Uncharted
  1x Sunder

  Planeswalker (1)
  1x Garruk Wildspeaker

  Creature (15)
  1x Azusa, Lost but Seeking
  1x Budoka Gardener
  1x Courser of Kruphix
  1x Dread Cacodemon
  1x Kynaios and Tiro of Meletis
  1x Llanowar Scout
  1x Mina and Denn, Wildborn
  1x Muldrotha, the Gravetide
  1x Oracle of Mul Daya
  1x Ramunap Excavator
  1x Sakura-Tribe Elder
  1x Skyshroud Ranger
  1x Tatyova, Benthic Druid
  1x Trinket Mage
  1x Walking Atlas

  Enchantment (7)
  1x Burgeoning
  1x Exploration
  1x Fall of the Thran
  1x Retreat to Coralhelm
  1x Rites of Flourishing
  1x Territorial Dispute
  1x Treachery

  Artifact (5)
  1x Amulet of Vigor
  1x Candelabra of Tawnos
  1x Crucible of Worlds
  1x Ghirapur Orrery
  1x Ward of Bones
</auto-card-list>

## In Conclusion

We'll see how powerful (or fragile) this deck is when I test it next week, but it was lot of fun to build and write about!

Until next time, happy brewing!

## Update

A week later, I got a chance to playtest the deck, and immediately made 22 swaps!

The core strategy as outlined in this article is the same, but if you want to read about the lessons I learned, check out the [changes post](/2018-05-11-edh-changes-karoo).
